McAfee.com - W32/SirCam@MM Help CenterMcAfee.com Home | Business | 
            Kids | McAfee Store 


             My Account Info | Renew | Log In  

             



                     Online Services  |  Anti-Virus  |  Business Corner  |  
                  About Us  |  Shopping  |  Support  |  Downloads   

       


                              Update ActiveShield

                              DAT Updates

                              Free Virus Map

                              Free Virus News

                              Virus Information Library

                              Virus Calendar

                              Virus Hoaxes

                              Virus Support

                              Virus Glossary

                              Anti-Virus Tips

                              Regional Virus Info

                              What's On Sale 







                                NEED HELP?
                                •Forgot your password?
                                Click here
                                •Redeem a gift certificate
                                •Buy a gift certificate
                                •Visit the Support Central







            W32/SirCam@MM Help Center

            DESCRIPTION - What virus is this?

            This is a HIGH RISK virus that is spread to email recipients found 
            in the Windows Address Book and addresses found in cached files. The 
            infected email can come from addresses that you recognize. Attached 
            is a file with two different extensions. The file name itself 
            varies. 
            The email message can appear as follows:
            Subject: [filename (random)]
                  Body:Hi! How are you?
                  I send you this file in order to have your advice
                  or I hope you can help me with this file that I send
                  or I hope you like the file that I sendo you
                  or This is the file with the information that you ask for
                  See you later. Thanks 
                  --- the same message may be received in Spanish --- 
                  Hola como estas ?
                  Te mando este archivo para que me des tu punto de vista
                  or Espero me puedas ayudar con el archivo que te mando
                  or Espero te guste este archivo que te mando
                  or Este es el archivo con la información que me pediste
                  Nos vemos pronto, gracias. 




            PAYLOAD - What can this virus do?

            When run, the document will be saved to the C:\RECYCLED folder and 
            then opened while the virus copies itself to C:\RECYCLED\SirC32.exe 
            folder to conceal its presence and creates a registry key value to 
            load itself whenever .EXE files are executed. 
            The virus searches for .GIF, .JPG, .JPEG, .MPEG, .MOV, .MPG, .PDF, 
            .PNG, .PS, and .ZIP files in the MY DOCUMENTS folder and attempts to 
            send copies of these documents to email recipients found in the 
            Windows Address Book and addresses found in cached files. 



            DETECTION AND REMOVAL 
            - How can I detect and remove this virus?

             McAfee.com VirusScan and Clinic users, 
             click here to update ActiveShield.

             Retail McAfee VirusScan users, 
             click here to get the latest DAT file.

            Scan Your System for Infected Files 
              McAfee.com VirusScan Online and Clinic users, click here to 
              perform a Scan. 
              If W32/SirCam@MM is found, use the delete option to remove it. 

            Manual Removal

            If you are unable to use the W32/SirCam@mm standalone removal tool, 
            see: 
            (http://www.mcafeeb2b.com/naicommon/avert/avert-research-center/tools.asp#sircam) 
            SCRMOVE2.zip, then you need to remove the worm manually. Directions 
            follow.

            IMPORTANT: Users with 24-hour Internet connectivity and/or those on 
            a network need to disconnect the computer from these sources. Follow 
            the removal procedures for all computers as well as the server. 
            Before reconnecting computers to the network or Internet, shared 
            files and/or drives should be password protected or have sharing 
            disabled altogether. Contact your network administrator for 
            assistance and advice concerning file sharing.
            Edit the Registry

                    Copy Regedit.exe to Regedit.com: 
                      Windows 95/98 users: Click Start, point to Programs, and 
                      click MS-DOS Prompt. 
                      Windows ME users: Click Start, point to Programs, point to 
                      Accessories, and then click MS-DOS Prompt. 
                      Windows NT/2000 users: 
                        Click Start, and click Run. 
                        Click Browse, and browse to the \Winnt folder. 
                        Double-click the Command.com file, and then click OK. 
                     
                    Type the following and then press Enter: 
                      copy regedit.exe regedit.com 

            Backup the Registry

                    Click on the Start button. 
                    Click on Run. 
                    Type REGEDIT.com in the Open field. 
                    Click the OK button. The Registry Editor window will appear. 

                    Click on the Registry pull-down menu. 
                    Click on Export Registry File. 
                    In the File Name field type "backup" (without the quotation 
                    marks). 
                    In the Save In field be sure that the desktop is selected 
                    (if it is not, click on the pull down menu and select 
                    "Desktop"). 
                    Select "All" in the Export Range group box. 
                    Click on the Save button. The registry will then be saved. 
                    Click the X in the top right corner to close the Registry 
                    Editor. 
                  NOTE: You now have a backup of your Registry saved as "backup" 
                  on your desktop. If you need to restore the Registry you can 
                  double-click on the "backup" file located on the desktop. Once 
                  these instructions are complete and everything is running 
                  properly be sure to delete this backup file by right-clicking 
                  on it then left-clicking on Delete from the pop-up menu that 
                  appears. This will ensure that the old registry is not 
                  accidentally restored once the worm has been removed. 

            Remove the Worm Entries from the Registry

            As you go through this process, you will be asked to confirm each 
            change. Make sure that the change is correct, then confirm each 
            change. 
              Click the Start button. 
              Click on Run. 
              Type in REGEDIT.com in the Open field. 
              Click the OK button. The Registry Editor window will appear. 
              Click on the plus sign next to HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT. 
              Click on the plus sign next to exefile. 
              Click on the plus sign next to shell. 
              Click on the plus sign next to open. 
              Single-click on command so it is highlighted. 
              On the right side of the screen is a Name column and a Data 
              column. Locate and right-click on (Default) under the Name column. 

              A pop-up menu will appear. Left-click on Modify. 
              The Edit String dialog box will appear with the value highlighted. 
              Delete all text in the Value and type the following characters 
              (WITHOUT THE BRACKETS): ["%1" %*] If you are unsure of how the 
              characters should be, the following is a spelled out version of 
              the correct characters: quote, percentage, one, quote, space, 
              percentage, asterisk. 
              Click the OK button to close the Edit String dialog box. 
              On the left side of the screen click on the minus sign next to 
              open. 
              Click on the minus sign next to shell. 
              Click on the minus sign next to exefile. 
              click on the minus sign next to HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT. 
              Click on the plus sign next to HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE. 
              Click on the plus sign next to SOFTWARE. 
              Single click on the SIRCAM folder so it is highlighted, then hit 
              delete. 
              Click the plus sign next to Microsoft. 
              Click the plus sign next to Windows. 
              Click the plus sign next to CurrentVersion. 
              Single click on the RunServices Folder so it is highlighted. 
              On the right side of the screen is a Name column and a Data 
              column. Under the Name column locate and single-click on Driver32 
              = C:\WINDOWS\SYSTEM\SCam32.exe so it is highlighted. 
              Press the Delete key on the keyboard to remove the entry. 
              Close the Registry Editor by clicking the X in the top right 
              corner. 
            Scan to Remove the Worm :

                    Connect to the Internet. 
                    Go to http://www.mcafee.com. 
                    Enter your password and email address, and click the Login 
                    button. 
                    Near the top-left of the page, locate the "Site Shortcuts" 
                    drop-down menu. 
                    Click the drop-down arrow and choose Scan, from under 
                    VirusScan Online. A new page will then load. 
                    Click the "Start" link in the box: Current users click here 
                    to start. 
                    If you are using this service for the first time you will 
                    then see a page with a "Start Download" link. Click on the 
                    "Start Download" link to download the necessary components. 
                    In the Scan In box select the drive you would like to scan 
                    (C: drive, etc). Then click the Scan button located in the 
                    lower right corner. 
                    The program will then scan the selected drive for viruses. 
                    If a virus is found a notification will appear in the Scan 
                    Results box. Delete infected files if they cannot be 
                    cleaned. 

            Windows ME Info:

            NOTE: Windows ME utilizes a backup utility that backs up selected 
            files automatically to the C:\_Restore folder. This means that an 
            infected file could be stored there as a backup file, and VirusScan 
            will be unable to delete these files. If the scan turns up an 
            infected file in the C:\_restore folder follow these instructions to 
            remove the infected files.

            Disabling the Restore Utility

                    Right click the My Computer icon on the Desktop and choose 
                    PROPERTIES. 
                    Click on the Performance Tab. 
                    Click on the File System button. 
                    Click on the Troubleshooting Tab. 
                    Put a check mark next to "Disable System Restore". 
                    Click the Apply button. 
                    Click the Close button. 
                    Click the Close button again. 
                    You will be prompted to restart the computer. Click Yes. 
                    NOTE: The Restore Utility will now be disabled. 
                    Browse to the C:\_Restore folder and remove the infected 
                    files. 
                  NOTE: To re-enable the Restore Utility, follow steps 1-9 and 
                  on step 5 remove the check mark next to "Disable System 
                  Restore". The infected file's are removed and the System 
                  Restore is once again active. 

            Check the Autoexec.bat file:

            No reference to the worm may be found here, but it is best to double 
            check.

                    Click Start, and click Run. 
                    Type the following, and then click OK. 
                      sysedit

                    The MS-DOS Editor opens.


                    A screen with 5 windows stacked will open. The first window 
                    will be the Autoexec.bat window. 
                    Search for the following line(no quotations): "@win 
                    \recycled\sirc32.exe" 
                    Delete only this portion if you find it. 
                    Click File and then click Save. 
                    Exit the MS-DOS Editor 

            Empty the Recycle Bin:

            Do not simply click on "Empty Recycle Bin" as you would normally. 
            You must use Windows Explorer to delete the file 
            C:\Recycled\Sircam.sys if it is present. 



            ANTI-VIRUS OPTIONS

                  McAfee.com Online Services
                  Not a subscriber to McAfee.com VirusScan Online or Clinic?
                  Select a button below:

                   McAfee.com
                        VirusScan OnlineMcAfee.com
                        Clinic

                            



                  Retail McAfee Software
                   Retail McAfee VirusScan 4.0.70 and above with DAT file 4149 
                  will detect and remove this virus.

                         Purchase McAfee VirusScan 5.21


                          Purchase VirusScan Software Maintenance Plan, and 
                          never get caught with an out-of-date version. 




             Click here for more information about this virus.






                  My answer was not listed. I wish to contact Technical Support.





             












             McAfee.com BrowserBuy VirusScan 5.1Software Under $20 

            Corporate VirusScanOptimize Your PCVirtual Bookstore


            FAQs | What's On Sale? | Events | Investor Relations
            Partners | Jobs | FREE Virus News


      Copyright © 2001 McAfee.com Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
      Please read our Privacy Policy.


